Alejandro Isaza: Hi.
I'm Alejandro.
Today David and I will introduce
TabularData,
a new framework for data
manipulation and exploration.
I'll start with a quick
introduction
and then we'll talk
about data exploration,
data transformations,
best practices,
and end with a recap.
Let's jump in.
First let me talk about,
what is tabular data?
In the simplest terms,
tabular data is data
that is organized
in rows and columns,
similar to a spreadsheet.
But imagine you had
hundreds of columns
and millions of rows.
This is where the TabularData
framework comes in.
So what is it?
It is a brand-new framework
we've been working on.
It's already available
in macOS, iOS,
tvOS, and watchOS.
It will help you explore and
manipulate unstructured data.
When I say "unstructured data",
I mean data
that has not been arranged
in a predefined manner.
For example, when you
download a dataset
that doesn't have
a technical specification;
say, weather data
or population statistics.
And exploration
is the first thing you do
when you encounter
a new dataset.
You want to know what sort
of information is there.
Things like,
what are the values?
What are the types?
How is the data represented?
Are there missing values?
And so on.
You need to be able
to answer these questions
to properly understand
a dataset
and to be able to move
to the next step,
which is manipulation.
Manipulation is where
you transform the dataset
into a form
that is best suited
for the problem
you are trying to solve.
For example, you may
want to represent dates
as a date type
instead of a string,
or you may want to combine
x and y coordinates
into a point type, and so on.
The TabularData framework
is great
for dealing with large datasets.
Here are some common use cases.
Grouping data according
to some criteria;
for example,
grouping people by age.
Joining datasets
on common values.
For example,
joining a table of transactions
with the purchaser's
information.
Splitting or segmenting data
for processing incrementally
or filtering to a subset
of the whole dataset.
And building data pipelines;
for instance,
when doing feature engineering
for machine learning.
In the context of the framework,
a table is known
as a DataFrame.
A DataFrame contains
rows and columns,
similar to a spreadsheet.
But unlike a spreadsheet,
every column can contain
only a specific type of value.
But this also means that columns
can hold any type,
even your own custom types.
For example, dictionaries,
GPS coordinates,
or raw audio samples.
Know that whenever we show a
table representing a DataFrame,
or a DataFrame slice, we include
an index column on the left.
This is relevant for when
you need to access rows
by data index.
Some operations like filter,
the data is unchanged,
while other operations like sort
may change the indices
on the resulting data frame.
Let's break it down
and zoom in on a column.
As I mentioned, a column
has a specific element type;
in this case, Int.
It also has a name that must
be unique in the data frame.
A column is represented
by the Column type,
which is a collection,
just like array.
You can refer to a column
by name
but in most cases,
you need the type as well.
There is a struct
called ColumnID
that holds the name and type
of a column,
and can be used to refer
to a specific column.
Whenever possible, I recommend
using predefined ColumnIDs
over string literals
to refer to columns.
Also note that
all columns in a DataFrame
must have the same
number of elements.
But there can always
be missing elements,
represented as nil values.
Similar to Column,
there is a Row type.
You can access
each element of a row
by column name or by index.
You can think of Row
as a proxy.
It doesn't actually contain
the elements in the row;
instead, it's a reference
pointing back
to a row in the DataFrame.
So how do you create
a DataFrame?
Let me show you.
You can create a DataFrame
from a dictionary literal
or by building one column
at a time.
This is an example of building
from a dictionary literal.
Note that when using
a dictionary literal,
you are constrained
to using basic Swift types
such as strings, numbers,
boolean values, and dates.
Also keep in mind
that every column
must have the same
number of elements.
A more general way
of building a DataFrame
is to build one column at a time
and then append the columns
to the DataFrame.
Here's an example.
First, I create
an empty DataFrame.
Then I create a Column.
And then I append the column
to the DataFrame.
I can repeat the process
for all the columns,
but again, make sure
that every column
has the same number of elements
and that column names
are unique.
Now that you know
what a DataFrame is,
let's do some data exploration.
The first thing you want to do
is load a dataset.
TabularData supports reading
comma-separated values, CSV,
and JSON files.
And it's as simple as calling
the initializer with a file URL,
which will load
using all default options.
Let's explore some
of the options available
when loading a CSV.
If you have used CSV before,
you may know
that there are not always
commas.
The separator may be
a tab or a semicolon.
Or there may or may not
be a header row
with the column names.
There are also variations
of how strings are escaped
for special characters
and how missing values
are represented.
TabularData can handle
all the variations.
In this example, I am specifying
that there is no header row,
using a custom nil encoding,
ignoring empty lines,
and using a semicolon delimiter.
Please refer
to the documentation
to see the full set of options
as well as the defaults.
If you have a larger file,
you may want to load
only a subset of rows
at a time.
You can do this
with the rows option.
For example, this will only load
the first 100 rows.
Similarly, you can select
a subset of the columns.
To do this,
use the columns argument.
Note that this will also let you
reorganize the columns.
Let me briefly talk about
how type inference works
when loading a CSV file.
CSV files are all text based.
But having every column
be of type string
is not very convenient.
So when loading a CSV file,
TabularData will attempt
to convert values to numbers,
boolean values, and dates
before defaulting to string.
If you want to force values
to a specific type,
or want to speed
loading up a bit,
you can explicitly specify
the type of a column.
You do this with
the types argument.
In this example,
we're specifying integer type
for the id column
and string type
for the name column.
This will not only speed up
the loading process,
but it will also throw an error
if there is a value
that cannot be converted
to the specified type.
This is good because it lets you
catch problems early
and handle them appropriately
instead of ending up with
a column of a type
that's not what you'd expect,
which can lead to crashes
later in your app.
Lastly, let me mention
date parsing.
TabularData, by default,
will detect and parse dates
in ISO8601 format.
If your CSV file contains dates
in a different format,
you will need to specify
a custom date parsing strategy.
I'll let David talk about this
and show you an example
when we go into the demo.
Now let's switch gears and
talk about writing data out.
The first and simplest choice is
to use Swift's print function.
This will generate a nicely
printed table in Terminal.
The printed output
includes the row index,
the column names,
the column types,
the first few rows of data,
and the number
of rows and columns.
It also indicates that not all
rows fit on the screen
and that not all columns
fit on the screen.
In this case, there are 10 more
columns that aren't displayed.
Print is great for exploring
and debugging,
but obviously not great
for storing data.
If you want to save
the DataFrame as a CSV file,
use the writeCSV method.
One important thing to note
is that writeCSV
will use every value's
default string conversion.
Be careful when using
custom types in your columns,
because the generated CSV
may not be something
that you can read back.
As a general rule,
use only the basic Swift types
in your columns
when writing to CSV,
which may require transforming
some of your columns.
writeCSV has some options
similar to the reading options.
They let you customize
how the CSV data is written.
Here is an example
where I'm disabling headers
using a custom nil encoding
and using a custom delimiter.
To access a specific row,
you can just use
the row subscript.
Then you can access
a specific column of that row.
But whenever possible,
you should instead
access the column first
and then the row.
This is how you access a column.
In the case of accessing
a column by name,
you can omit the column: label
from the subscript.
You can also access
a subset of rows.
In this case,
you get a DataFrame slice.
A DataFrame slice is
very similar to a DataFrame.
It is basically a reference
to the original DataFrame
In most situations,
you don't even need to know
whether it's a full DataFrame
or a slice.
And lastly, you can also
select a subset of the columns.
This will return
a new DataFrame
that includes
only those columns.
You can also select
a subset of the rows
with the filter method.
The result of the filter
operation is a DataFrame slice,
similar to selecting
a range of rows.
But unlike a range of rows,
filter can return
discontiguous rows.
You need to be careful
when dealing with
DataFrame slice indices.
Similar to array slices,
their indices reflect the
indices of the original rows.
Specifically, the first index
may not be zero,
and the next index may not be
the current index plus one.
As with string indices,
you want to use
startIndex instead of zero,
endIndex instead of count,
and index(after:)
instead of adding one.
Now that I've covered
the basics,
let's put it into practice
by building an app.
Finding parking
in San Francisco is hard.
David and I want to build
an iPhone app
that shows nearby parking spots
on the street.
We want to use data
published by the city
to identify parking meters
that are close by
where parking
is currently allowed.
We know there is a dataset
but we don't know
exactly what it contains.
So the first step is going
to be exploring the dataset
to understand what we have.
I'll hand it off to David.
David Findlay: Thanks,
Alejandro.
Hi. I'm David,
a framework engineer.
In this demo,
I'll go through an example
of how you can use TabularData
to explore a dataset.
I'll start by exploring
a CSV file of parking policies.
The first step
is to load the data,
which I can do easily
by passing the file url
into the DataFrame initializer.
Note that the initializer
is throwable,
which I find useful
when handling
potential parsing errors.
Next, with a simple print,
I can explore the first few
rows and columns.
Loading took a few seconds,
and that's because the DataFrame
loaded over a million rows
and 15 columns into memory.
When I'm exploring a dataset
for the first time,
I don't usually need
the whole dataset,
so I'll specify a row range
when loading the data
to speed up my exploration.
Next, I'll take a look
at the columns.
Notice that two of them
are hidden to the right,
since they wouldn't
fit on the screen.
Let me show you how to fix that
with formatting options.
Formatting options
let me configure
how the data is presented.
In this case, I'll increase
my maximumLineWidth to 250,
reduce my column width to 15,
and reduce the rows to five
to prevent scrolling through
the printed result.
Then I can simply
add the formattingOptions
to my print statement
using the description method.
Great! Now that I can explore
all of my columns,
I'll pick a few interesting ones
to keep.
It's also a good opportunity
to reorganize the columns
by listing them in the order
that I want.
I have HourlyRate,
DayOfWeek,
start and end time,
StartDate, and PostID.
All I need to do next is to add
these columns as a parameter
when loading my DataFrame.
All right, this is already
so much easier to explore.
Take a look
at the StartDate column,
which has a string type.
That's because
only ISO8601 dates
are detected automatically.
I'll need to explicitly specify
any other date format.
I can fix that by using
CSVReadingOptions
that Alejandro
explained earlier.
Using Foundation
Date Parsing API,
I'll add a date parsing
strategy.
I'll specify the format
as year, month, day;
the locale as US English;
and the time zone
as Pacific Standard Time.
Then I'll pass
the CSVReadingOptions
when loading my DataFrame.
Now that the StartDate column
has the right type,
I can easily filter
the DataFrame
so that I have only active
parking policies.
Starting with the variable
to represent the current date,
then I'll filter the DataFrame
using the filter method.
The filter method
takes a column name --
in this case, StartDate --
and a type -- Date.
In the closure,
I unwrap the optional date,
returning false
when the date value is nil
so that it doesn't appear
in my filter result.
And lastly,
I keep the start dates
that are less than or equal to
my current date.
I'll go ahead
and change my print
to show you the filtered result.
From now on, I won't be
needing the StartDate column,
so I'll go ahead and remove it.
But I need to be careful,
since I can't remove a column
from a DataFrame slice.
I'll first have to convert
to DataFrame
and make filteredPolicies
of var,
since removing a column
is a mutating method.
Now I can remove the column
using the removeColumn method
and specify the StartDate column
as the column to remove.
All right, that's all
I wanted to explore
in the parking policies dataset.
In the next section,
Alejandro will discuss ways
that you can augment
your tabular data.
Back to you, Alejandro!
Alejandro: Thanks, David.
Now I now have some great
insights into the dataset.
The next step is going to be
transforming and augmenting it
to match our needs.
The simplest kind
of transformation
is changing the values
within a column.
This can take the form
of a map operation
where each value
is mapped to a new value,
possibly of a different type.
TabularData provides
an in-place version of map
as a convenience:
transformColumn.
In this example,
I am transforming
the DayOfWeek column
from a string to an integer
representing the weekday.
This what the code
would look like.
For each element, we convert
the string to an Int.
Similar to transformColumn,
the decode method
handles decoding of data.
When dealing with CSV files,
you may encounter
arrays or dictionaries
embedded within the CSV
as JSON values.
TabularData provides
a decode method for this.
Here is an example
where the DataFrame on the left
has an embedded
JSON data blob.
Decode lets you
use a JSONDecoder
to transform the column
into your own type;
in this example,
Preferences.
And this what the code
would look like.
Keep in mind that
the Preferences type
needs to conform
to the Decodable protocol,
and the column needs to
contain elements of type Data,
which is what JSONDecoder
expects as input.
Another useful operation
is the filled method.
It lets your replace
all missing values in a column
with a default value.
And to finish the list
of column operations,
I like to mention summary.
Summary gives you
a quick overview
of the contents of a column.
The summary method returns
a categorical summary.
It includes the number
of elements,
shown in the description
as someCount;
the number of missing elements,
shown as noneCount;
the number of unique elements;
and the most frequent values,
known as the mode.
There is also numericSummary,
which is only available
for columns containing
numeric values.
It includes counts as well,
plus mean, standard deviation,
and other statistics.
Here, I'm showing
the print result of summary.
But you can also
use the summary struct directly
to access the statistics.
For instance,
if you want to filter scores
to the ones
in the 75th percentile.
OK, that was a lot of column
transformations,
but column transformations
are not the most interesting.
DataFrame transformation
is where it really gets
interesting.
Unlike column transformations,
DataFrame transformations
manipulate multiple
columns at once.
A simple example is sorting.
We all know how sorting works,
but let me illustrate
for clarity.
Let's sort this table by score.
This affects all columns.
Also note that row indices
change when sorting.
Another interesting
DataFrame transformation
is combineColumns.
The combineColumns method
lets you combine
multiple columns into one.
For example, imagine that
you have separate columns
for latitude and longitude,
but you want to combine them
into a CLLocation type.
Here is an example
of doing this.
First, I specify the columns
I want to combine.
Then I give a name
to the new column.
Then I specify the types
of the input columns
and the new column,
and note that everything
has to be optional.
I handle the missing value case,
and I build the new value.
Similar to column, there is also
a summary method for DataFrame.
It returns summary statistics
for every column.
Note that this may be costly
if you have a large DataFrame;
it may be better to summarize
only the columns
you are interested in.
Another interesting method
is explode.
It takes a column that contains
an array of elements
and creates a new row
for every element in the array.
Let's look at this example.
This time, the scores column
contains an embedded array
of scores for each person.
If I apply the explode operation
to the DataFrame,
each of these
becomes a new row.
We have repeated names for
people who had multiple scores.
This is useful when filtering
or doing other operations
that require looking
at each individual score.
With these tools in our arsenal
I'll turn it back to David,
who will help us
get the meter data
into the form that we need it.
David, show us some code.
David: Thanks, Alejandro.
I don't know about you,
but for me,
the most important part
about parking is the location.
Luckily, I have another CSV file
that has just what I need.
Let me show you
what's in there.
Similar to before,
I'll start by loading the data,
but this time, I already know
the columns I'm interested in.
I have POST_ID,
STREET_NAME,
STREET_NUM, LATITUDE,
and LONGITUDE,
and I'll print the result
using the same formattingOptions
from the previous demo.
The first augmentation I want
is to combine the latitude
and longitude columns
into a new column
with a core location type.
The combineColumns method
is perfect for the job.
Here, I'm combining the latitude
and longitude columns
into a new column
named location.
In the closure, I specify
the latitude and longitude
parameter types and
the core location return type.
Next, I unwrap the optional
latitude and longitude values,
returning nil in the case
that either one is nil.
And finally, passing the
latitude and longitude values
to a core location initializer.
With location in my DataFrame,
I can start building
the first feature for my app:
given a location, search
for the closest parking meters.
I'll write a function
named closestParking
that takes a location,
a DataFrame,
and the amount of parking meters
to include in the search result.
I'll start with a local copy.
And then using
the transformColumn method
that Alejandro introduced
earlier,
I'll transform location
to distance.
And then, of course, I'll rename
the location column to distance.
Finally, I'll sort
the distance column
in ascending order and limit
the number of spots to return.
Just for fun,
let's test this out
using the Apple Store
in San Francisco.
I'll plug in the coordinates
that I found on Apple Maps,
the meters DataFrame,
and limit the search result
to five parking spots.
Perfect! It looks like
there's lots of parking
close to the Apple Store
on Post Street.
The first feature of the app
is working great,
but what if all of the closest
parking is already taken?
The next feature of the app
is to find streets
with the most parking.
But before I implement
this feature,
let me introduce a new concept
called grouping.
Grouping splits your data
into groups,
given a grouping column.
For example,
the STREET_NAME column.
The group method
first identifies
unique street name values --
Post Street, California Street,
and Mission Street --
and then splits the rows
into corresponding groups.
Each group is a DataFrame slice.
Now, let's jump back
into the code.
I'll group the meters
by street name
using the grouped method.
Then I can count
how many parking meters
each street group has
and serve the result
in descending order.
The streets
with the most parking
are at the top of the result,
which is what I need for my app.
This is so awesome!
Two great features for my app.
But wait a minute,
I just realized there's a bug
in the first feature.
The closest parking meters only
consider the meters DataFrame.
What I really need
is the closest parking meters
with active parking policies.
This is getting interesting,
since that information
is in the data from demo one.
Let me show you how to join data
from two different sources
so that I can fix the bug.
You may be familiar with joining
if you've used
a relational database before.
It allows you to combine
two DataFrames together
using a key.
The key is a value that appears
in both DataFrames.
In the meters and policies
DataFrames,
the key is the POST_ID,
which uniquely identifies
a parking meter.
The join operation results
in a DataFrame with rows
where the POST_ID from meters
matches the POST_ID
from policies.
The rows are composed
of the matching data
from the left DataFrame
and the right DataFrame.
Notice that the column names
have either a left
or right prefix.
This indicates
which side of the join
the column came from.
The prefixes help avoid naming
collisions in the join result.
This operation
was an inner join,
which is the default.
There are three other
join kinds:
left outer, right outer,
and full outer.
I won't go into
the details here,
but please refer to the
documentation to learn more.
All right, that's all
I wanted to cover
in tabular data augmentations.
In the next section,
Alejandro will talk about
best practices.
Alejandro: Thanks, David.
Now that we have all the data
in the form we need it,
it's time to build our app.
Let me talk about how you can
reuse your exploration code
while making it
production ready.
Let me go back
to the code we started with
for loading a CSV file.
If you do this, the columns
are going to have unknown types.
This is problematic for
operations like filter or join
where you need to know the type
ahead of time.
If you are loading the data
from a user-supplied source,
making assumptions
about the type is risky.
It may lead
to your app crashing.
Instead, you should declare
the types that you expect
when loading data,
like in this example.
Here, I'm defining column IDs
for every column I care about.
And then I'm providing
both the column names
and the column types
to the CSV initializer.
Remember that you can use
the column ID
instead of a string
in any method
that refers to a column.
Now, if there are
invalid values,
you will get an exception
that you can handle,
for instance, by presenting
an error to the user.
This way you can ensure
you have the columns
and column types you expect.
This is particularly important
when using custom date formats
because if you don't specify
that your column
is of type date,
the date parsing
may fail silently
and produce a string column
instead.
Forcing it to be a date
will throw an exception
that includes the contents
of the cell that failed,
which will help you debug
the problem.
Speaking of errors,
these are the sort of errors
you should expect
when loading a CSV file.
Failed to parse
will be generated
when using a custom date parser
and a cell fails to parse.
The other ones
are self-explanatory,
but please refer
to the documentation.
And to finish, let me
briefly mention performance.
Most of the time, you should not
need to worry about performance,
but there are a few cases
where you will see
a large impact
when working
with large datasets.
The first one is date parsing
when loading a CSV.
Date parsing has a lot of
special cases and considerations
and as such,
it tends to be slow.
If your CSV file takes more than
a couple of seconds to load,
this is the first place
you should look
to make improvements.
One option is to delay parsing.
This works particularly well
when you don't need
the date information
right away.
For instance,
you want to perform
filtering or grouping first.
If that's not an option,
consider handcrafting
a date parser
that optimizes performance
for your date strings.
When grouping, always use
a column containing
a basic Swift type
as the group column,
such as string or Int.
This will speed up
grouping performance.
If you are grouping
by more than one column,
consider first combining the
columns into a single column
of a simple type first
and then grouping.
For example,
if you want to group
by day of week and meter type,
consider combining those two
properties into a string.
For instance, day-type.
Similarly, when joining,
consider joining on a column
containing a basic Swift type.
With this, we are ready
to finish the app.
David, let's wrap it up.
David: Using TabularData
best practices,
I'll write the app's
search functionality.
The Parking struct
will store the joined meters
and policies DataFrame.
And I defined
a location ColumnID,
since multiple methods need it.
Let's dive into the details
in the loadMeters method.
At the top,
I have the Column IDs
that I need for loading
the meters.
Then, I load the meters
and specify the expected
types of each column.
This will throw
if there's any mismatch
in the provided CSV file.
Next I verify
the resolved columns
are exactly what I expected,
and I'll throw a custom
ParkingError otherwise.
Lastly, I refactored
the combineColumns operation
to use the latitude, longitude,
and location column IDs.
With that, the app's
search functionality
is production-ready.
I'll hand it back to Alejandro
for a recap
of the TabularData framework.
Alejandro: Thanks, David.
Let's recap.
Today we showed you how
TabularData lets you explore
an unknown dataset,
manipulate it,
and bring it into your app.
We explored a dataset,
looked at some column
and data transformations,
and we finished
with some best practices
around error handling
and performance.
I can't wait to see
how you use TabularData
to make great apps.
Thank you!